Michael Richardson: Hello!
Luigi Iannone: Hello!
Nancy: Good evening, good morning, good afternoon.
Michael Richardson: It is indeed one of those.
Nancy: I think we have one of every.
Luigi Iannone: Shall we start?
Luigi Iannone: Can you hear me?
Nancy: Yeah, I think
Nancy: we can. I mean the reason why I raised changing the time as I worried Luigi. We
Nancy: we don't have a whole lot of people on the call.
Luigi Iannone: But that because I think we have.
Nancy: The most vocal ones.
Luigi Iannone: I think so.
Nancy: Yeah, and the ones doing the the the workload. So, yeah.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, yeah, I think so. So we we can start in a certain way. We have a
Luigi Iannone: a relatively simple agenda. Why doesn't go forward here.
Luigi Iannone: So the main agenda is about agenda so 1st of all, welcome everyone. As Nancy said. Good morning. Good afternoon. Good evening to everyone. Anybody has comments on the last meeting please feel free to share.
Luigi Iannone: otherwise we will go directly to talk about the next agenda in the Itf. When we have the official both. We submitted the request.
Luigi Iannone: So we just need to wait for the reply from the Isg.
Luigi Iannone: Seems no comments
Luigi Iannone: simple slide. So in in this slide on the right hand side. You see the the agenda we had in the previous boss. it was 1 20, okay.
Luigi Iannone: and on the left hand side is what we put
Luigi Iannone: on the both requests temporarily. I mean in the sense that this is just a a skeleton on of our agenda. But we have to discuss the details. And
Luigi Iannone: who will present what? And the exact sequence of item and timing.
Luigi Iannone: Okay, just as a reminder. In the previous both we
Luigi Iannone: we did a bit too much in terms of use cases, presentation.
Luigi Iannone: And at the end of the day. The the message was not that clear?
Luigi Iannone: for the audience? So we have we. We really need to be a little bit more focused this time on the agenda, and better controlled timing. I think
Luigi Iannone: so, Oops. Let me end the show actually, so that I can edit but a little bit bigger.
Luigi Iannone: So at the beginning I think we will have the usual introduction. Not well, blah blah
Luigi Iannone: The wire here to me is just going quickly through the different list of site meeting, but without any details.
Luigi Iannone: Preparing this slide. In the buff request we we put
Luigi Iannone: I put the the summary of feedback received from the last buff at the beginning
Luigi Iannone: but might be, we can think, to put it actually here.
Nancy: Yeah.
Luigi Iannone: Right before the open discussion.
Luigi Iannone: So so just to open the discussion.
Nancy: I think, Luigi, somewhere in the agenda I lost over this. So my apologies we actually need to discuss.
Nancy: and the mic discussion should really be on the proposed charter.
Luigi Iannone: Okay, so you mean, really have a a charter item.
Nancy: Yes.
Luigi Iannone: So.
Nancy: Summary of feedback from the last.
Nancy: Boff is good, but I don't know that we had a really
Nancy: we had a proposed charter, but we didn't get to it if I recall so.
Luigi Iannone: Yes.
Nancy: Right in here. We actually need to spend the bulk of the time
Nancy: in providing a summary of the problem statement that leads to the charter
Nancy: before we can get into the Internet draft, meaning the importance here is to pulse from
Nancy: whoever shows up in the room.
Nancy: The polls and get consensus that yes.
Nancy: this is work that belongs in the Ietf.
Nancy: and the second piece is that
Nancy: not only does it belong in the Itf. This is the scope in which
Nancy: the working group is going to approach. First.st
Luigi Iannone: Okay, so summary of the problem statement in charter discussion. And you, you want to put this
Luigi Iannone: before discussing the Internet draft that that did. I understood correctly.
Nancy: Correct.
Luigi Iannone: Okay.
Nancy: Because what what Deb is going to want to hear is
Nancy: the those 2 questions. And then she wants to get a sense of the room.
Luigi Iannone: So you meaning ask,
Luigi Iannone: he at the beginning, also ask about
Nancy: No, no, no, no, we.
Luigi Iannone: Oh, okay. Okay.
Nancy: We ask at the end.
Nancy: What I'm telling you is as the area director. Deb is going to want to listen
Nancy: right? To cause. That was the feedback she gave us at the end. Because, remember, we
Nancy: ask and pulse, and she goes. No, you guys aren't even ready.
Luigi Iannone: Yes.
Nancy: And part of it was, we spent too much time on here the drafts and proposed solutions. Whereas we need to just get to? Does everybody understand
Nancy: the problem and the challenge that we want to solve?
Nancy: Not a solution, because that's what the working group is going to do. But
Nancy: does everybody understand the problem statement?
Nancy: And then how we scope that into something a working group can progress.
Nancy: Make sense. Yeah.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. Yeah.
Luigi Iannone: just wondering whether or not this we-we, he.
Luigi Iannone: Let's say the the order is the right one. Whether should be there, let's say at the beginning, before
Luigi Iannone: before discussing the documents, or actually inverting a little bit things this.
Nancy: So everybody else should chime in.
Nancy: Michael, you've done this before.
Nancy: and all of the working groups that I've done and chartered.
Nancy: We don't talk about the drafts. We talk about the problem statement.
Nancy: I think Michael's description of architectures would be helpful.
Nancy: But we don't talk about drafts.
Michael Richardson: So I don't think it's a problem to mention that there are drafts that exist that are in the directions that we are thinking.
Michael Richardson: But
Michael Richardson: I don't think it's the right time. I agree with you to talk about them. The reason to talk about that they exist
Michael Richardson: is to simply make it clear to the audience that
Michael Richardson: we're not just pulling, you know, wishes out of thin air.
Nancy: And that's a fair statement.
Michael Richardson: Okay? And
Michael Richardson: And so yeah, what you said problem saving. So the other thing I would say is that
Michael Richardson: as the the work grows
Michael Richardson: or as the the what's the right word is the as the marketing effort grows. That we will get new people who arrive in a state of
Michael Richardson: confusion. And what what's this about? And with with wide variety of wrong ideas. So we actually have to kind of quickly, and we'll get better at this. I'm sure
Michael Richardson: we do have to stop, step through it as if the people in the room are seeing this for the 1st time, but
Michael Richardson: bounded time.
Nancy: Correct.
Michael Richardson: Right? So summary problem statement chart, you know. Yeah, that's that's good. But I would make that really
Michael Richardson: 2 points.
Nancy: Yeah, there should be 2 separate bullets. Luigi.
Luigi Iannone: Good.
Nancy: Yeah.
Michael Richardson: And I would mention in that
Michael Richardson: there are documents. Put up a slide with a list of some of them.
Michael Richardson: Don't, don't, and then say, you know, but
Michael Richardson: we can talk about them at the end if there's time. But our focus is on the charter discussion.
Michael Richardson: You know.
Michael Richardson: people can click on the links and go see the things they want to see, and then run to the mic right.
Chunchi Liu: So after the charter discussion there should be like a list of documents. But we we won't jump into it. Maybe this is another bullet point.
Michael Richardson: Yeah, I would put well.
Michael Richardson: I would put that under problem statement. But anyway.
Michael Richardson: if there are drafts which we, our charter, calls out already, as you know, starting points. I don't think we've done that.
Nancy: I don't think it's been mentioned before.
Michael Richardson: Some charters are like, you know, that you will start from this document. That's the problem statement, or something like that.
Nancy: I'm trying to remember. The most contentious one I did was rats.
Michael Richardson: Okay.
Michael Richardson: you didn't.
Michael Richardson: You should have been there in 2,000 for the VPN. Boff.
Michael Richardson: That was a disaster.
Nancy: Roman lost his cool. I've never seen Roman lose his school with rats.
Michael Richardson: With rats. Oh, really, I don't. Don't remember that. But okay.
Nancy: I had to be the peacekeeper. Yeah.
Michael Richardson: Wow. Okay.
Nancy: Remember, rats had 2 contingents, and they each wanted their own separate working group.
Michael Richardson: I. It's all I maybe I've just blocked it all out from trauma.
Nancy: You must have
Nancy: Luckily we're not in that situation here.
Nancy: But I remember whether it was
Nancy: skim or rats, or teep, or suits
Nancy: or mile all the ones I've shared.
Nancy: We spent a lot of time making sure that the problem statement was well understood.
Nancy: The boundaries around that problem statement.
Nancy: Well, I guess the boundaries where we shift from problem statement to working group.
Nancy: to then refining what's achievable in the 1st charter.
Nancy: And so that was something. We worked very hard, and it was very difficult,
Nancy: and rats to get the group to agree that. Yes, you may believe the scope is narrow in the initial charter, but once we start
Nancy: moving forward we could recharter.
Nancy: which is what has happened, and several working groups.
Michael Richardson: Luigi, did we stall you?
Luigi Iannone: No, no, no, no, no, no, absolutely not. I'm just thinking a little bit.
Nancy: Bulk of the time is gonna get spent in these 2. The summary and the charter.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, that's fine. That's fine.
Michael Richardson: I was trying to think.
Luigi Iannone: How much time to allocate to you? Check him?
Luigi Iannone: Okay,
Luigi Iannone: And and whether in the problem statement, if we should.
Luigi Iannone: what to say, should we start with a with a practical use case just one main example, and then.
Nancy: Give the.
Luigi Iannone: Abstract problem, statement or not. That is what I was actually.
Nancy: I mean.
Luigi Iannone: My son.
Nancy: What resonated with me. I believe Michael had a Powerpoint
Nancy: that showed some of the scenarios, and I think.
Nancy: Michael, I think you articulated some of the use cases.
Michael Richardson: Closed architecture, or.
Luigi Iannone: Let me look at.
Luigi Iannone: I think that evolved a little bit in the service model that that mailing is working on
Luigi Iannone: with other people.
Luigi Iannone: Am I right?
Nancy: Well.
Chunchi Liu: All right.
Nancy: I'm trying to give you my impressions of what resonated.
Luigi Iannone: Better.
Nancy: With some of the other chairs, and Deb.
Luigi Iannone: I actually remember what? What did stick a little bit in the in the audience was the the example that Michael gave about the luckily, man, routing, let's say so that that.
Michael Richardson: About the what.
Luigi Iannone: La Clement, the the Swiss Lake.
Michael Richardson: Oh, yeah, yeah, right? Yeah. I think that's a good one. And I really should put that in a in a diagram in a I just said that verbally, yeah, but somebody. It would be great if someone could articulate the various legal
Michael Richardson: requirements that are coming down.
Michael Richardson: And then, you know, you know we could.
Michael Richardson: Give that example of you know what
Michael Richardson: what we're you know thinking about here, right.
Toerless: May I chime in a little bit.
Michael Richardson: Torreleas.
Luigi Iannone: What?
Toerless: Yep.
Nancy: Go for a torlus.
Toerless: Right. So you know, I think
Toerless: these are the correct formal requirements to go through and above. I mean the the maybe less well written practical requirements that, you know Isg is looking at are, you know, much more simple right in terms of? Is there a solid and diverse enough base of authors to do the work
Toerless: from from different companies, right or contributors. So is that
Toerless: is that well positioned in in one or 2 slides in in terms of that that people can see. That
Toerless: is the work focused enough, I think, in the 1st Boff
Toerless: it did appear ultimately, because we got into a lot of discussions to be more
Toerless: around the place. So you know,
Toerless: how can we create slides that will show focus. And that will show that what's been proposed to be written is going to be, you know.
Toerless: limited enough that it can be achieved in reasonable time and can lead to, you know, implementation. And these implementation can do something useful. So that's, I think, all on the base of it. In the end. It's a sales job, right, and when you're through with all of that, and and that is well done in slides, especially, you know, at the end. Right? So if you go all the way to the end. People need to be refocused again
Toerless: on those core core things, right? So broad agreement, you know, by
Toerless: sufficiently many different companies to do the work.
Toerless: Work is limited.
Toerless: and it can actually result in something that can be implemented. Right? So I think that's what you always have to rethink for yourself.
Toerless: That that's in
Toerless: in the final, in the conclusion slides afterwards. Right? So I'm starting from the reverse. Right?
Toerless: And then, of course, the question is, how many you know negative people will there be? Do we know what the biggest concerns were who was expressing the biggest concerns in the 1st buff. Can they be brought over already upfront before the buff starts? Right? So that that people by, you know, feeding them? You know exactly that positive summary information.
Toerless: I don't think we've had a lot of negative pushback. Maybe some people have said.
Michael Richardson: You know. Oh, this would be! This is impossible, you know there'd be too slow or something. But I I don't think that was very, even very loud. What did someone else have? Some
Michael Richardson: experience like that, Torrelis? Do you know.
Toerless: I don't remember. What I primarily remember was that your slides were a lot of great architecture, exactly all the stuff which, during Anima, you know, Benoit was totally against kind of you don't do any architecture. I just want to do functional stuff that can be implemented.
Toerless: and that may be a little bit outdated. Maybe the Ietf and Isg is more open to architecture, but in the end I think it's it's always good to remember that, you know, showing focus on, you know, here are the drafts that are going to to achieve things that can be implemented. It's still at the core of this stuff.
Toerless: and then you may throw architecture around it.
Toerless: But I wouldn't focus on, you know, architecture as as the core deliverable.
Luigi Iannone: As far as I remember, during the last the main, let's say the main concerns main point where
Luigi Iannone: routing the the fact that wasn't clear what we do on routing.
Luigi Iannone: and we address this with this part
Luigi Iannone: focusing, though, on on forwarding there was the comment on
Luigi Iannone: proof of non transit, which is
Luigi Iannone: basically impossible. We have to to state during the buff that this is something that we cannot prove
Luigi Iannone: the proof of not transit and
Luigi Iannone: in the the 3rd point, the 3rd point was about the the
Luigi Iannone: the users of the the tool in order to
Luigi Iannone: to say, is it related to the Iab statement. That was also a confusion about the fact that attestation is used to block clients. But it's not our case. So
Luigi Iannone: I think that there are not.
Luigi Iannone: There were no big push back like this is something shouldn't be done right? So those.
Toerless: As if they are kind of points to highlight.
Toerless: As you know, evolution. Since the 1st buff round to
Toerless: focus and answer the open questions.
Toerless: Right? So so that's kind of good work towards excluding negatives and and open questions.
Toerless: I think it doesn't necessarily answer very simple things like, okay, what's you know, for somebody who thinks as an implementer the outcome of this right? So what would be a likely
Toerless: Mvp. Right? And an Mvp. That can come out of, you know the 1st charter round.
Xueyan Song: Can I make a comment?
Luigi Iannone: Sure.
Xueyan Song: Yeah, thank you. It's my 1st time to attend this meeting.
Xueyan Song: is she? And from the key
Xueyan Song: about the trouble. I think I agree with that. The problem statement you know, is the 1st priority work.
Xueyan Song: So based on the problem analysis we can to do some scope. Narrow
Xueyan Song: for example. You know the use case, the the architecture
Xueyan Song: requirements and and accept the scope maybe we can also discuss about the objective of this. Wg,
Xueyan Song: and then we can talk about this work. You know the relationship of this work with other wgs, such as rents
Xueyan Song: and may also we can discuss
Xueyan Song: some some work, you know. From other sdos.
Xueyan Song: Oh, so it may be related with other standard organizations.
Xueyan Song: Yeah, it's my comment.
Xueyan Song: Okay, thank you.
Luigi Iannone: So you mean we we should also mention other efforts in order standardization bodies.
Luigi Iannone: That's what you said at the end.
Xueyan Song: Yeah.
Luigi Iannone: Okay.
Meiling Chen: My. My suggestion is.
Meiling Chen: Hey, Malindsay. My suggestion is that we we just focus only on on what we need to do. I mean the charter.
Meiling Chen: but what we have already done. I see the
Meiling Chen: drafts we have already finished. We we can just summarize, what? It! Briefly, but not in too much details. I'm concerned about that. The discussion on the open mic may get into stock in architecture, details.
Luigi Iannone: So not not going in architectural details, right?
Meiling Chen: Yeah, not going too much about architecture.
Toerless: Right. So did you. Did you have an idea about describing an Mvp.
Meiling Chen: No.
Nancy: Torlis, are you asking whether I don't think we need to do that?
Toerless: Well, I it would be I mean.
Meiling Chen: What do you mean for Mvp.
Toerless: Minimum viable product in terms of what? What is the minimum implementation that you know
Toerless: implementers can get out of. You know the working group, and that does something useful.
Nancy: Per user.
Nancy: I mean, we can build something implementable. But will it really address challenges and problems that users are facing.
Chunchi Liu: Well, personally, I think this Mvp. Thing is is good, but it's good to have right. So this is something that we can, you know. Just mention one sentence while we're describing work items like, for example, when we're discussing architectures, we can say
Chunchi Liu: we can build open source implementations and demo this in Hackathon, and maybe that's it. And
Chunchi Liu: what do you think.
Toerless: Well, so I would say, if we don't have a very clear, here is the one killer. Use case. We're building exactly against that, and that is going to make money. Then I think it might be good to remember how many years lisp meandered in trying to find use cases that were making money right so, and use that as a positive argument
Toerless: that we have a lot of possible scenarios that are listed on the right hand side of the slide of use cases where Nasr is used. But we may not have identified the single, you know.
Toerless: Killer, use case that we're certain about.
Nancy: I think that is a very fair point, Torlis.
Toerless: But we you need to know that upfront. Right? So you you should be proactive about that in the same way as yeah. Look how far we've gotten with lisp. And it's still, you know, that's the best technology we have for a lot of different use cases, and that they only evolved over time with the industry, experimenting with them. Right? So so that that you know you're not surprised when people start to ask about you know, how?
Toerless: How is this going to be implemented? You know, how is this going to make whoever you know participates in the working group make money? Right? So
Toerless: That that proactive stuff, I think that helps to, you know, avoid falling into the trap that people are then saying, Well, you're not ready because you haven't answered that question of of the Mvp.
Nancy: Yeah, I think 2 2 things that you have raised to our list is somewhat concerning. And maybe it's just because we don't have full participation
Nancy: is, I don't know how how wide in the number of vendors we have interested in this.
Toerless: Well, if the
Toerless: are researchers that are going to build open source references to experiment around with it. That's perfectly fine as well.
Nancy: But I don't see them on the call.
Toerless: Yeah, yeah. So, but I think we already knew that anything that
Toerless: can bring 3 time zones together is going to suck.
Nancy: Well, okay, let me another way. In the last boss
Nancy: there were a lot of people that were curious, and they came up to me and asked me a lot of questions, but they had no interest.
Nancy: and they didn't see the value proposition
Nancy: to to your point. Can I make money out of this.
Michael Richardson: So. If if you know, even if we get them remote, some of the people that presented that the scion day, and I I don't know if the scion folks will make it there or not. To
Michael Richardson: to Bangkok.
Michael Richardson: You know there were some really good use cases there. Where, you know. Yeah, things.
Michael Richardson: were either. The case of of network users who didn't want to do didn't want to pay for lease lines anymore, and wanted more flexibility and more resilience by essentially throwing their hat in with everyone else. So they are looking at saving money. Okay? And then we had the operators who were responding to that, who were like, Oh, okay, I'm going to sell, not just a
Michael Richardson: a dark fiber from point A to Point B, but a managed service.
Michael Richardson: and then we had the question of the vendors who were going to supply them equipment right?
Michael Richardson: And so I think the latter one is well represented that the itf
Michael Richardson: but the previous 2, you know, that would be great to have
Michael Richardson: something there. But I think we're kind of. We're a little bit past that point, but
Michael Richardson: and I don't know that we have time to do it, but maybe we should have us have some connection there to
Michael Richardson: to what's what's happened at the Scion day, and things like that.
Nancy: So someone who's not in this. What scion day.
Michael Richardson: Scion Day was a 1 day event back in October that they've been doing yearly for 2 or 3 years, which is the scion SCIO, n, which is this
Michael Richardson: Swiss consortium that has built an overlay network that does something like what we're nasser does.
Nancy: Oh, okay.
Michael Richardson: Okay? And there, there are some Internet drafts. And they may be good folk. Good, good rep. They should be on that draft document that draft page there, 3 lines down and whether or not they're the right way to go. I don't know, because there's technical details that I don't understand yet. But
Michael Richardson: They've at least done this in in, you know, white box implemented overlay networks and seem to be reasonably successful at doing the things that I just said like, so so
Michael Richardson: I.
Luigi Iannone: Think there are a couple of needs on the science side compared to NASA, because
Luigi Iannone: this is an overlay. The main use case is banking. Apparently Swiss banking system is using it. There is a a lot of routing there, a lot of routing and certification on the routing side. They don't have. Really. An explicit proof of transit, because once you you
Luigi Iannone: secure, let's say the routing, and you trust everything that is there, then you don't need the proof of concept, because, anyway, you are in a trusted environment.
Luigi Iannone: So.
Michael Richardson: Well, I would put it differently. I would say that the proof of transit was probably too expensive
Michael Richardson: to be
Michael Richardson: okay. And and so I think it's a place where that's where the push is like. Well, no, we want to put this. Put this down in the forwarding layer, but to do that requires a larger investment.
Michael Richardson: And therefore a a a bigger market. But there was a was a presentation about well, there were 2 presentations. What that I was saying. One of them was about an entity. That was, I think, that was the Swiss Settlement Bank
Michael Richardson: in the middle of the pandemic, the beginning of the pandemic. They had a 0 day exploit on their VPN. Server.
Michael Richardson: and
Michael Richardson: so they were in a situation of We can't go to the office and fix it because we're not allowed to. And we're not sure if we should use the VPN. Server because to fix the VPN. Server, because it's
Michael Richardson: whatever. And then they realized, oh, but we but the VPN. Server also knows whether or not the traffic is coming through the overlay scion network. And so they could say, we can turn off connectivity from outside Switzerland.
Michael Richardson: because that so that that completely limits our our exposure. And then they're like, oh, okay. So now we can, we can fix the we can do the upgrade we wanted to do, etc, and that that seemed to be a real, a real thing, and they might, you know, later on, have re-enabled it because people need to remote work from you know
Michael Richardson: that part of France that's on the other side of la me
Michael Richardson: and you know whatever, but that they could actually be more skeptical about those those addresses because they're less there and then. The other example that was given was actually, I think it was actually a
Michael Richardson: a city traffic control
Michael Richardson: kind of network, right? I mean, like physical cars and trucks and stuff network. And they just were tired of running their own lease lines. So they wanted to have a system that was had a higher assurance level.
Michael Richardson: Then the open Internet. But, on the other hand, they just wanted to be able to buy commodity Internet connections, from whatever you know, from a variety of suppliers. So they weren't actually, ever, you know, beholden to one supplier. And that, they wouldn't have their whole network go down at the same time.
Toerless: But so
Toerless: what? What is the likely? You know? Easiest explanation of the positioning of NASA versus scion right is, is, can we position? NASA, is something that a scion solution could add on to get more security.
Michael Richardson: Yes.
Luigi Iannone: Yes.
Michael Richardson: Yes, I would call it.
Toerless: Can we can we call.
Michael Richardson: File.
Toerless: Can we get hire people to support that statement?
Michael Richardson: Nasr version 0 point 8.
Toerless: No, no, wait a second. Can we get scion people to support that statement?
Nancy: Right.
Michael Richardson: I think so.
Michael Richardson: Okay, I think that.
Nancy: I have people participating in this.
Nancy: I mean, when Torres is asking, can they? You know they actually be need need to be in the room.
Toerless: Well, not necessarily, you know. I think if if you do, the
Toerless: I don't want to put a name to it, although most people would know who I'm thinking of. But if you basically think of the one document where you write stuff that you can have everybody contributing to the effort, sign off on and put them on as co-authors on. Then, you know, that can be used as a reference for people not in the room, especially in Bangkok, when that may be a limited thing, but you can point to it
Toerless: right
Toerless: if you, if if we do, have, you know, 10 or 12 people that are all interested in different aspects of these of of NASA. Right then figure out what is the document? You can write that where you can put all of these people on a list of authors. That document doesn't have to survive
Toerless: right? But it's a statement of support. It's a statement of engagement and specific interests in in NASA,
Toerless: right that that can chime in. For you know, people not being in the room. Of course, you know, it would be nicer to have people in the room
Toerless: or remotely attending. But you know, especially if you want to target Bangkok, I wouldn't want to count on that.
Nancy: Yeah, and you corrected me. Well, cause when I said in the room, I didn't mean physically in the room.
Toerless: But I mean, even even if if all these people are in the room, a lot of people are looking through the documents and making decisions, especially from Isg or so right there. They're not going to be all in the room. They're looking at the documents, and you know they're they're looking at the list of authors right.
Nancy: Correct.
Toerless: So that's never a bad thing. Of course you'll never get a document through with all these names, but if if you can look at the list of names and try, then easily figure out, what are they going to contribute? What are they going to support of the technology? Then that's a lot of help for decision makers in the Itf.
Nancy: So it's a question of can we get such a letter with
Nancy: people that are willing to, you know.
Nancy: Usually, when I do an adoption. Call on a draft. I I try and probe. You know, people who would review the draft people who would implement the draft.
Nancy: I forget the 3rd question. But so I think you're.
Toerless: It's kind of if you have something like, you know the NASA problem statement. And you know directions. For you know, experimentation, right? So kind of you know this, this, these are the problems we want to get solved here, the experiments we would like NASA as a working group to do. And then you put all the you know people who are, you know, saying yes, they're interested. They're supporting the effort and or even they're contributing to it. You put that as names on.
Toerless: So that's kind of some written evidence, for you know, sufficient, you know, participation in Nasr.
Nancy: Hmm.
Chunchi Liu: In a problem statement, draft.
Toerless: For example, right something around that right, something which is intangible enough that all the people will be happy to have their name mentioned in there.
Chunchi Liu: Yeah, that'll be a great idea.
Toerless: And that doesn't have to be a document that ultimately gets out of NASA. Right? So that doesn't have to become a deliverable.
Nancy: Oh, it's.
Toerless: Postage, document.
Nancy: Right.
Luigi Iannone: Wouldn't be the A use case document, a possibility where people say this is the use case that I'm interested in, and I think that NASA can solve it.
Toerless: It could be, it could be right. So. But that's really, you know, you need to sit down, create the list of names and try to figure out what what is the best document that that they'll all sign off on.
Luigi Iannone: We have the list of use cases of the previous side of the slide. Those can be.
Nancy: So it's the question of.
Toerless: When somebody presents the use cases.
Nancy: As part of the problem statement that
Nancy: that set of slides could have
Nancy: the list of names and contacts of the vendors, proponents that are effectively validating.
Nancy: The use cases.
Nancy: And by way, it's showing support.
Chunchi Liu: Yes, there should be a 1 pager slide. And also
Chunchi Liu: let's just decide like, where where should we put this written evidence? In which document. Maybe just in the requirement and problem statement document, we can just have another section.
Nancy: Guys, it doesn't have to be cast in stone
Nancy: in the charter or the document I'm saying
Nancy: for this, Boff, we want to demonstrate that there is a wider community.
Nancy: and so putting in in the presentation should be sufficient.
Toerless: And problem statement can be broader than full use cases. For example, you can have a researcher that loves to do. Oh, I don't know, p. 4. Forwarding code and doesn't really have an idea about the overall use case stuff, but would be saying, Hey, we can validate. We.
Toerless: you know, are interested to implement that proof of concept in p. 4, code or so. Right? So that's something in the problem statement where you know validation of the feasibility of, you know that proof of transit and high speed forwarding stuff, just as an example.
Toerless: right.
Nancy: Michael, you posted Nicholas name on the chat.
Nancy: is he someone that's been active.
Michael Richardson: Yeah, I would say so. I don't know that he's he certainly was at the last.
Nancy: Off.
Michael Richardson: He was at the.
Nancy: Alright, so.
Luigi Iannone: In Dublin.
Michael Richardson: Yeah. He was at.
Luigi Iannone: It wasn't.
Michael Richardson: Dublin. He was in Dublin, and he's he spoke. He actually spoke at previous ripe about scion
Michael Richardson: not this past one, but the one before, and I believe he was at our side meeting in
Michael Richardson: Where were we in the summer?
Luigi Iannone: No, that's good, but it's.
Toerless: Was Vancouver.
Michael Richardson: Vancouver. I think he was in Vancouver. I think he was in Vancouver.
Michael Richardson: anyway, I also posted a link to the diagram I just did about Lac Lemay. There you go.
Toerless: Well, scion is certainly interesting. I'm not sure what what amount of reciprocity they would like to see for scion itself as a solution to somehow get through.
Michael Richardson: So. So one of the comments, one of the limitations for Scion's ability to grow is that there is only one source of of it
Michael Richardson: right? There's an open source project, but it's not. It's not feature. It's not feature competitive with the other
Michael Richardson: entity. And the clients who want to use this are like, well, this is wonderful, but I can't have a single source.
Toerless: Yeah, but I understood. But how are they going to solve that? I mean, do you think that
Toerless: whole of scion itself could or should be specified with a Nasr.
Michael Richardson: I think that's the only way of them actually growing beyond that and getting, you know.
Michael Richardson: commodity, silicon, that that can do proof of transit. For instance, I don't think there's a lot of remote attestation involved today in scion, but I think it's these are all things like, you know, if we had more money and
Michael Richardson: mind share, and whatever that they would go that way. So I would say, think of them as a interested in original, you know, promoter or implementer.
Michael Richardson: Well, that's my guess.
Toerless: I think the problem with scion in that extent is that
Toerless: they they have a complete solution with, you know, as people said, a lot of routing and other aspects in there which you know people in the Itf might feel to be.
Michael Richardson: I would say they have a minimum viable product.
Michael Richardson: Okay, that satisfies 70% of the needs of their current users. They have a bunch for whom that is not enough.
Michael Richardson: And and then they have a a multiple source problem.
Michael Richardson: So I don't think they can. I don't think, given the size of their current market, as it were, there is, which is limited by the what their solution can do.
Michael Richardson: I don't think that, and there will be another entrance entrant into that market.
Michael Richardson: As it is so, I think that they need to grow a little bit.
Michael Richardson: And I think that this is the right way, and I'm not going to speak for Nicola, but my impression is from you know, the interactions I've had with him is that he is very enthusiastic about this, and that any pieces of scion that we need to use, or cannibalize, or or whatever they are, they are
Michael Richardson: massively happy with that right.
Toerless: Okay. But so so let's my point was, we are not targeting to get all of scion standardized in NASA.
Nancy: No.
Michael Richardson: No, there could be some things that we don't like or don't need, or we do differently.
Michael Richardson: Okay. But I would say, that's a discussion. A wonderful problem discussion to have once the group is chartered.
Michael Richardson: I don't think we put any words that say we are in a base on scion, so I don't think.
Toerless: No, no, understood. I'm just. I'm just saying I was just wondering about the reciprocity that they might be expecting in terms of you know any help to to get all of scion somehow through the Ietf. But that certainly is a broader problem.
Luigi Iannone: They are trying to to push science through the art here, so far as far as I know, because they have a set of documents that they regularly
Luigi Iannone: updating panarchy. Alpha, aware networking research group.
Toerless: Okay.
Toerless: well, so what would be good to understand that they're happy, you know, to support us, even though we from Nasser cannot give a lot of reciprocity instead beyond.
Luigi Iannone: So, as Michael said, Nicola was participating in the side meetings at the very beginning. I I think that that
Luigi Iannone: his issue is. He doesn't see
Luigi Iannone: how much science fits or doesn't fit in in the NASA scope. So that's why he's like, let's say.
Luigi Iannone: not the main guy pushing for Nasser is looking is nasser, useful or not for science. That's my impression.
Toerless: No, but I think I think maybe we can even generalize this this type of use case right? That there may be, you know, secure
Toerless: virtual overlay networks.
Toerless: Whom are, you know, at least in part, using proprietary architectures?
Toerless: You know, which I think is true for most of the Sdn. And maybe one big group of
Toerless: you know, use cases, for Nasr is to be, you know, an underlying forwarding component to help those networks, even though the whole architecture may not be itf standardized, and scion may be an example which, for example, might get, you know, documented through Irtf or other tracks in the itf. And
Toerless: but it may be just one of those type of solutions that could use. NASA
Toerless: might be good good sales story.
Meiling Chen: Or or we can can from another side from the operators site is assigning on the Swisscom network. Maybe Swisscom can provide some experience, so can we find someone from Swisscom who are interested about such as what a CIO and card they cannot do, but can do.
Toerless: Yeah, I think that that I think this this this point. What
Toerless: NASA could help Scion to do better. I think Michael or others from the team could write it up, and then we can exactly find the the people's name from
Toerless: either scion and or operators that are putting it in that would support that notion.
Chunchi Liu: Well from my previous experiences with sign people I have reached out to them several times. They
Chunchi Liu: have. They appear to be, you know, kind of want to synchronize their protocols very independently. Like based on their based on on their own implementation. So my suggestion is that because now they already, you know, working the irtf and they might have some progress. Their incentive to work with us might be
Chunchi Liu: week. So my my suggestion is that maybe we should. We should have like a self-contained story, and not to have many dependent on sign as a as a blocker or dependent.
Toerless: No, no, agreed. Which is why I was also suggesting to do the work writing down text that relates to scion ourself
Toerless: and then get. You know, the name of people from scion or operators using scion to sign off on that
Toerless: right something that makes it easy for them to support it without having to invest work.
Luigi Iannone: I think we speak more about the the science use case rather than the science solution itself. Right?
Michael Richardson: Yeah, that's what I would say.
Nancy: Yep.
Toerless: So the scion type use case.
Toerless: or specifically the sign use case.
Luigi Iannone: So say on the end is is banking. That's the main use case right.
Toerless: Well, that that's what makes the money. Yes.
Chunchi Liu: Yes.
Toerless: There is no reason why it should be limited to that.
Toerless: No, but that's basically how they make their money, and they're happy with it, and they don't need more to keep themselves afloat.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, actually, they want more, because some of the people require interoperability with different implementation. That is why they at the end they reached out to.
Luigi Iannone: So they they are greedy as well, just joking, just joking.
Toerless: I don't know if it's.
Luigi Iannone: No, no makes sense. I mean what they do absolutely just joking.
Toerless: Do we have other adjacencies? Have has anyone talked with the lisp folks which by themselves don't really have any serious security layer, but but always trying to combine with security methods.
Toerless: is there, you know, an adjacency that could be defined through use cases.
Michael Richardson: Sounds reasonable.
Michael Richardson: I haven't talked to them, but.
Luigi Iannone: I sent several emails on the mailing list since I'm chairing that working group. But nobody came back
Luigi Iannone: officially, you know. Let's say to.
Luigi Iannone: I think there were folks in the boss that participate. But today.
Luigi Iannone: just as subservice, let's say not
Luigi Iannone: but what kind of of of
Luigi Iannone: do you mean using lisp as a NASA solution or part of it of the what do you mean? Exactly. Totals.
Toerless: Yeah, I I mean.
Toerless: lisp is used for for overlay Vpns, right? So. And and lisp by itself doesn't have security right? So you combine it with some form of security.
Luigi Iannone: Security is broad. What do you have is that you can have a encrypted tunnels. Okay?
Luigi Iannone: And and yeah, and you have a mean to secure the mapping system because you have to do a look up for the mapping, and that's it. But it's not
Luigi Iannone: specifically designed for secure or trusted environments, like something NASA will.
Luigi Iannone: Oh, wants to do.
Toerless: No, no, I was just throwing this in as kind of the closest thing to, you. Know something in the itf that does overlay networking.
Luigi Iannone: Oh, yeah.
Toerless: Right, and doesn't have a fixed and done security architecture.
Luigi Iannone: True correct.
Toerless: I'm not saying I have a solution. I'd rather like the possible opportunity to define an adjacency in the iitf.
Toerless: which you know scion itself is not right because it's not in the itf, otherwise.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, and just trying to to better understand. What do you mean by adjacency? You mean that NASA could be the the security architecture of lisp. Something like that. You mean.
Toerless: One option, of course. Right? I mean, let's test
Toerless: so so many things. Right? So like, here is how Nasr could make certain type of lisp use cases better. And you have some lisp people that say, yeah, sounds like a good idea.
Luigi Iannone: Yes.
Toerless: And I totally don't know what that exactly would be.
Luigi Iannone: I can think about it.
Toerless: But again, don't don't think about you know these these type of you know
Toerless: open questions. If you think you already have sufficiently many names of people with use cases whose name you can put up on the slide on the problem statement. Right? So start with, you know what you think you have solid
Toerless: in terms of evidence of support and
Toerless: work that people are going to do.
Toerless: And only if you know you think that list is insufficient, go further.
Toerless: Because I haven't seen that list. Right? So that's
Toerless: I mean, I'm just trying to explain this process of kind of starting from the end right so, and going back
Toerless: through the charter right? So this bottom up right? So you you're top down, starting from the chart and everything. And I'm
Toerless: bottom up in terms of okay, what's the list of people we can work with? What can we get from them? How do we, you know, put this together on slide or in a problem statement with the names, reach out to them individually.
Toerless: See that they agree on. You know what we would like
Toerless: to say they're supporting a NASA, right? So that type of.
Luigi Iannone: Yes, and this should be be before actually discussing the chapter. I mean agenda. Wise, right?
Toerless: Well, no, I mean in the end, this is, this is kind of here's the support we have. Here's kind of that is something that ultimately the most important part is at the end.
Toerless: When you summarize, when you restate right, that.
Toerless: When you want to show the support. The people
Toerless: the names. That stuff right? However, what whatever doing in the beginning?
Toerless: That's that's all. Just entertainment. The the important stuff is when people want to start open. Mic, what what are you going to say in the last 5min before the open mic.
Toerless: That's basically your restatement and summary.
Toerless: That's when you need to. Kind of.
Toerless: That's that's the most important stuff to have worked out.
Luigi Iannone: Let's see.
Chunchi Liu: I think the time is running out a little bit.
Michael Richardson: Oh, yes, actually.
Chunchi Liu: But we have the important points, I think.
Luigi Iannone: Yes,
Luigi Iannone: we just need to to to start to to structure the slide slides so that we we have something to discuss in the next meeting, which is
Luigi Iannone: on February 12.th
Luigi Iannone: Different time, as usual.
Luigi Iannone: We're trying to.
Nancy: My early time, Luigi, for the next one. Right sorry.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, so oh, that's fine.
Toerless: Good time.
Luigi Iannone: In Europe. It's pretty comfortable.
Toerless: Oh, this this is! This is even California friendly.
Nancy: Yeah.
Luigi Iannone: Yeah, it's a little bit tougher in Asia.
Toerless: My my next interim has to be 4 Am. For me, so it's or 5 am. So it's.
Nancy: Harry.
Toerless: Things you do.
Chunchi Liu: So, so I think the time is okay. And I suggest, maybe this time we should have it like online Google slide or something that we all iterate and work on instead of you know, people proposing, you know, slides. Should we? Should, we, you know, create a online slide folder and that that kind of thing, and send to the list.
Luigi Iannone: That's not a bad idea. I can do that.
Chunchi Liu: Yep.
Luigi Iannone: Google, if Google Docs works for everybody we can, we can use that tool.
Chunchi Liu: Yeah. And then we can write whatever you know.
Luigi Iannone: Okay.
Luigi Iannone: All the people.
Toerless: That you think of really reach out individually to them and ask them if they're going to be in Bangkok, or if if they're planning to remotely attend as the 1st step, and you know, once you even get responses from them, then the next step is to see if you know
Toerless: you know what, what.
Toerless: what could be written into an appropriate document to be able to have their name supportive on
Toerless: a slide about it, or even the problem, statement, use case, kind of document.
Luigi Iannone: Yes, to work in parallel. So let's see.
Meiling Chen: Okay.
Meiling Chen: Carlos. for the name. I I will try to collect and record the people who to reposit participate in nurser
Meiling Chen: is them okay?
Luigi Iannone: Yeah.
Luigi Iannone: okay,
Luigi Iannone: as usual, I will try to prepare the minutes in in a couple of days before the end of this week. And when once I send it out, I will also provide a link to our Google, Doc, slides so that we can work
Luigi Iannone: together on the slides and put everything together hopefully, we have those
Luigi Iannone: good amount of people and slides to discuss for the next interview.
Nancy: Sounds good.
Chunchi Liu: Sounds good.
Chunchi Liu: I'll send the minutes.
Nancy: Next month.
Nancy: Sorry.
Luigi Iannone: Okay.
Chunchi Liu: I mean, I will send minutes. But at the end of the day it's it's just that.
Luigi Iannone: Oh, appreciate it!
Chunchi Liu: Be snazzy.
Luigi Iannone: Okay, since we are done for today. So I can go grab another coffee to really wake up and.
Meiling Chen: Great.
Meiling Chen: I can go for my lunch.
Luigi Iannone: Good. So we'll meet again 12 of February, and in the meantime we will try to make progress on a slide, and contacts with people sort of gather support. Okay?
Chunchi Liu: Wonderful.
Meiling Chen: Okay.
Luigi Iannone: Okay.
Toerless: Thank you very much to everybody for the nice discussion.
Chunchi Liu: Alright. Thanks. Guys.
Toerless: Bye.
Meiling Chen: Bye.
Chunchi Liu: Bye.
Luigi Iannone: Bye-bye.